Interrogation of big genomic data and integration with large-scale protein-protein interaction networks and pathways, can provide deep patterns that are rare– yet can prompt dramatic phenotypic alterations and serve as clinical signatures. Mapping cancer-specific co-occurring mutation-pair signatures, in primary and metastatic tumors, is indispensable in precision oncology. The additivity of co-occurring driver mutations in different genes (in trans) can lead to powerful oncogenic signals, encoding aggressive proliferation. Rare co-occurring in trans combinations can serve as metastasis markers; excluded combinations may give rise to oncogene-induced senescence (OIS). We employed a statistical framework to identify significantly co-occurring mutations in the pan-cancer mutation profiles of ~60,000 tumor sequences from the TCGA and AACR GENIE databases. We found 3424 statistically significant different gene double mutations that alter non-redundant pathways, i.e., have different downstream targets and interactions, and promote specific cancers. We identified co-occurring double mutations in different genes that additively can promote tumorigenesis through single or multiple pathways. They are mostly in primary tumors. We evaluated affected pathways by identifying cancer type specific subnetworks derived from protein-protein interaction networks with the Page Rank Algorithm, where using the different double mutation harboring genes as seeds helps discerning disease specific interactions.


